                                     Optics and Laser Technology
                Parametric curvilinear mask optimization with rigorous gradient
                                                 --Manuscript Draft--

Manuscript Number:                       JOLT-D-26-04401R1

Article Type:                            Research Paper

Section/Category:                        Optical information processing and systems

Keywords:                                Lithography; Curvilinear mask; Parametric curve; Rigorous gradient; Gradient-based
                                         optimization; Smooth target

Abstract:                                A general framework is proposed for the parametric curvilinear mask optimization with
                                         rigorous gradient. As an example of parametric curve, the piecewise cubic Bezier
                                         curve is employed to represent the curvilinear contour of mask. By optimizing only the
                                         normal displacements of online knots and reconstructing the offline knots, the number
                                         of design variables is reduced while maintaining the smoothness of curve. Rigorous
                                         gradient of the objective function is derived, in which continuum‐based formulations of
                                         design velocity and indicator function provide important links between the variation of
                                         design variable and the variation of mask transmittance. Gradient based optimization
                                         with simple strategy of adaptive step size is implemented. In addition, the methods of
                                         rasterization and target smoothing are presented. The proposed framework can be
                                         employed for any parametric curvilinear mask and even for Manhattan-style mask.
                                         Experiments with masks whose average critical dimension is 87 nm and area is 2.36
                                         um demonstrate that the optimization can be completed around 2~seconds and the
                                         average of maximum edge placement error is below 3 nm.




                    Powered by Editorial Manager® and ProduXion Manager® from Aries Systems Corporation
Cover letter




               To Editor, Optics & Laser Technology

                                                                                                       2026.6.8

               Dear Optics & Laser Technology Editor,

               We would like to submit our manuscript entitled "Parametric Curvilinear Mask
               Optimization with Rigorous Gradient" for consideration for publication in your journal
               Optics & Laser Technology.

               Summary of the Work

               This paper presents a novel and general framework for parametric curvilinear mask
               optimization in optical lithography, with a key focus on deriving the rigorous gradient of the
               objective function with respect to design variables — a significant technical challenge that has
               not been adequately addressed in prior parametric-curve-based mask optimization research.

               Key Contributions

               1. Rigorous Gradient Derivation: We establish three essential links to obtain the rigorous
               gradient: (a) the design velocity linking design variable variation to mask contour variation via
               the analytical parametric curve; (b) the indicator function linking mask contour variation to
               mask transmittance variation; and (c) the contour integration of the product between gradient
               density and design velocity. This rigorous approach fundamentally improves upon existing
               methods that rely on gradient-free optimization or approximate EPE-based gradients.

               2. Efficient Design Variable Strategy: By optimizing only the normal displacements of online
               knots and reconstructing offline knots, we halve the number of design variables while
               maintaining curve smoothness, enabling efficient gradient-based optimization.

               3. General Applicability: The proposed framework is not limited to Bézier curves — it can be
               applied to any parametric curve representation (e.g., B-spline, NURBS) and can even
               accommodate Manhattan-style masks.

               4. Impressive Experimental Results: Using the ICCAD 2013 benchmark masks (scaled 1.25×,
               average CD = 87 nm, area = 2.36 μm²):
               - Each OPC completes in approximately 2 seconds
               - Average maximum edge placement error (EPE) is below 3 nm
               - The method significantly outperforms pixel-based methods in both pattern fidelity (avg. max
               EPE 2.59 nm vs. 9.35 nm) and convergence behavior

               Significance

               As the semiconductor industry moves toward smaller nodes and curvilinear mask geometries
become increasingly important, the ability to perform fast, accurate, and manufacturable mask
optimization is critical. Our framework provides a mathematically rigorous approach that
combines the geometric flexibility of parametric curves with the efficiency of gradient-based
optimization. The results demonstrate strong potential for full-chip applications, with estimated
throughput of 100 mm² wafer area per 24 hours using 1000 CPUs.

We believe that this work represents a meaningful advancement in inverse lithography and
optical proximity correction, and will be of great interest to researchers and engineers in the
field of computational lithography.

Additional Information

- This manuscript has not been previously published and is not under consideration elsewhere.
- All authors have approved the manuscript and agree with its submission.

Thank you for considering our manuscript. We look forward to your positive response.

Sincerely,

Shiyuan Liu, PhD, Professor
Director of Precision Instrument Research Center (PIRC)
School of Mechanical Science and Engineering
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
1037 Luoyu Road, Wuhan, Hubei 430074, China
Tel: +86 27 8755 9543
Email: shyliu@hust.edu.cn
Webpage: https://pirc.hust.edu.cn
Response to reviewers




                 Dear editor and reviewers,

                 We thank the reviewers very much for the careful reading and insightful comments on
                 our paper. The comments are very important and helpful. We carefully considered all
                 the comments. The following summarizes how we responded to the comments, and
                 the changes are highlighted in the revised paper.



                 Best Regards,
                 Qi Xia, Shiyuan Liu
Response to the comments of Reviewer 1:

 Comment:
I believe that your manuscript provides a good overview of the prior and current
options for OPC with curvilinear data and for OPC simulation. Your description and
details of the method you implemented are clear and detailed. It is a good
accomplishment to implement a new global optimization method for curvilinear
pattern OPC.

Response:
     We thank the reviewer for the comments.


 Comment:
However, the pattern resolution and OPC accuracy portions of the results are not
sufficient to be considered state of the art. 0.93NA 193nm dry scanners were used for
the 45nm logic node with minimum feature sizes of about 65-70nm, considerably
smaller than 87nm feature used for the results.

Response:
      We thank the reviewer for the insightful comments. The typical minimum feature
size is about 65-70nm for 0.93NA 193nm dry scanners. In the revised manuscript, we
deleted the remarks about the resolution in the discussion of the results.
      However, to achieve such size, it may require integration of a suite of advanced
technologies, not only the optical proximity correction (OPC) and off-Axis Illumination
(OAI) employed in the present study, but also the sub-resolution assist feature (SRAF),
phase-shifting mask (PSM), and source-mask optimization (SMO). Therefore, in the
present study the minimum feature sizes is larger than 65–70 nm. In our future work,
SRAF and SMO will be integrated with the proposed method to improve the resolution.


 Comment:
Also, the error section description should be more clearer about where on the patterns
the largest errors are observed. Figure 8 should be redone (or another figure added)
to show direct overlap comparisons between the rounded target pattern and the
simulated wafer contour (ie, simulation of the OPC'd mask).

Response:
    In the revised manuscript, another figure (Fig. 9) is added to show the comparison
between the smooth targets and the simulated wafer contours. In the figure, star-
shaped markers are used to indicate the evaluation points where the maximum of the
absolute value of EPE arise.




 Comment:

Additionally, the term used in the manuscript “transferred pattern” is vague and
should be made clearer. I believe that you are referring to the simulation of the wafer
contour after OPC but readers will not be certain without a more description.

Response:
    It is true that “transferred pattern” in the manuscript refers to the simulation of
the wafer contour. To avoid readers’ misunderstanding, “transferred pattern” is
changed to “simulated wafer contour”.



 Comment:

I believe the max errors listed (average of 2.59nm) could be reasonable or but are more
likely unreasonably large depending upon where on the patterns they occur. That is
why direct overlap of simulated wafer contours and rounded target is important. In
general a max error of 3% (=2.59/87) would be considered too large for production
OPC, especially a global solution which will be more time intensive. Because (as
mentioned above) a more reasonable min feature CD would be about 65-70nm, a
2.59nm error should probably be considered nearly a 4% error which is definitely too
large. I suggest that you should debug your global solver results further and describe
where these larger errors are coming from (so that you can mention that in future
work they will be reduced).

Response:
    We thank the reviewer for the insightful comment. As can been seen in Fig. 9
added to the revised manuscript, the maximums of the absolute value of EPE arise
near corners. More specifically, on the round corners of the smoothed targets.
     In addition, the entire OPC procedure is carefully debugged and two
improvements are added to the revised manuscript. Accordingly, all the optimizations
are redone.
     The first improvement is about the computation of resist image. A paragraph is
added to the end of Section 3.2 as following:
“It is worthy to note that applying Eq. (19) to compute the resist image produces high frequency
components that do not exist in the aerial image. In such circumstance, if the pixel size is not
adequately reduced, aliasing occurs, which results in distortion of simulated wafer contour and
directly contributes to errors in EPE. Therefore, the aerial image obtained by Eq. (18) is first up-
sampled to a fine grid by using the FFT based interpolation, then the resist image is computed via
Eq. (19). With the high resolution resist image, the pattern contour on wafer and EPEs are obtained.
In addition, the high resolution resist image is down-sampled to the same grid of aerial image by
using the FFT based interpolation, and the result is used to compute the pattern error and rigorous
gradient, which will be described in the next section.”
    The second improvement is about the target resist image Z0. A paragraph is
added to the end of Section 4.4 as following:
“After the smoothed target having being obtained, the target pattern Z0 is computed by using the
signed distance function Φ of the contour of smoothed target, and it is given by
                                                    1
                              Z0 (𝐪) =                                                         (35)
                                                  Φ(𝐪)      t
                                         1 + exp ( σ − ln 1 −r t )
                                                                r

where 𝜎 is a parameter that controls the steepness of Z0 around Γ; tr is the threshold parameter
in Eq. (19). It can be readily verified that Eq. (35) ensures the value of Z0 equal to tr on Γ.
The signed distance function Φ is computed by
                                     Φ(𝐪) = sign(𝐪) ⋅ dist(𝐪, Γ)                                (36)
where 𝑠𝑖𝑔𝑛(𝒒) is the sign function; 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡(𝒒, 𝛤) is the minimal Euclidean distance between point
𝒒 and the contour Γ. The distance is computed by using the fast sweeping method [40]. The sign
function can be readily obtained by using the indicator function χ in Eq. (4) as
                                     sign(𝐪) = −2χ(𝐪) + 1                                (37)
The minus sign in Eq. (37) ensures the gradient vector of the sign function pointing outwards to the
boundary. The indicator function 𝜒(𝒒) and the distance function 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡(𝒒, 𝛤) are computed on a
grid refined by 16 times, then Z0 is obtained via Eq. (35), finally it is down-sampled via the FFT-
based interpolation.”
      In addition, the number of optimization iterations is increased from 20 to 30, and
the initial time step is increased from 1.2 to 1.4. Because of these improvements, the
average max EPE is reduced to 1.98nm, i.e., 2.3% of 87nm. In future work the errors
will be further reduced.



 Comment:

Finally, the word “firstly” on page 5 and page 17 should be changed to “first”. While
grammatically correct, first is considered somewhat old fashioned.

Response:
     All the word “firstly” are changed to “first”.
Response to the comments of Reviewer 2:

 Comment:
Overall optimization method and descriptions is good. Great work!

Response:
     We thank the reviewer for the comments.


 Comment:
Page2 - paragraph3: Curvilinear masks are written using Multibeam-mask writers. All
multi-beam mask writers do rasterization, i.e. convert geometry data (Bezier/B-splines
or piecewise linear polygon) to grey pixels. So, the premise of binary representation is
not true. In fact, high accuracy can be achieved if the mask optimization understands
the pixel size of the mask writer. So please update the paragraph accordingly.

Response:
     We thank the reviewer for the insightful comment. Several sentences about the
binary representation is revised, and the following sentences are added to the paper.
“It is worthy to note that the multi-beam mask writers used to manufacture curvilinear masks
convert geometric descriptions (for instance Bezier or B-spline curves) into greyscale pixel maps,
thus the assumption of a strictly binary mask representation is not necessary. Actually, if the pixel-
based mask optimization explicitly accounts for the pixel size and the number of available dose
levels of multi-beam mask writers, high-fidelity curvilinear features can be realized.”


 Comment:
Page7 - section2.4: The description provided is very similar to implicit Bezier, which is
already used in the industry standards. How is this different from that? Add some info
to compare it with Impicit Bezier curves defined in the Multigon format used in
photomask industry. If it isn't different then use the standard industry term of Implicit
Bezier.

Response:
      We thank the reviewer for the comment. The procedure of offline knot
reconstruction is the same as the industry standard SEMI P49-0823, as we pointed out
in the previous version of the paper, i.e., “The procedure of reconstruction is described
as follows, and reader can refer[18] and SEMI P49-0823 for details.”
     In the revised version, to make it more clear, the related sentence is changed as
follows at end of the first paragraph in section 2.4:
“The procedure is the same as the implicit cubic Bezier curve in the industry standard SEMI P49-
0823, and it is described as follows for the convenience of readers. Also, readers can refe[18] and
SEMI P49-0823 for the details.”
                                  Click here to access/download;Figure;compare_M1_1_error_history.eps


                5.0
                               proposed method
                4.5            pixel-based method



Error (log scale)
                4.0

                3.5

                3.0

                      0   10                      20                                        30
                           Iteration
                                  Click here to access/download;Figure;compare_M1_2_error_history.eps



                5.0
                               proposed method
                4.5            pixel-based method



Error (log scale)
                4.0

                3.5

                3.0

                2.5
                      0   10                      20                                        30
                           Iteration
                                  Click here to access/download;Figure;compare_M1_3_error_history.eps




                5.0
                               proposed method
                               pixel-based method
                4.5



Error (log scale)
                4.0

                3.5

                3.0

                      0   10                      20                                        30
                           Iteration
           Click here to access/download;Figure;ex_Bezier_curve.eps




     p1   p2




p0                                           p3
Click here to access/download;Figure;ex_design_variable.eps
Click here to access/download;Figure;ex_knots_first_1.eps
Click here to access/download;Figure;ex_knots_second_1.eps
Click here to access/download;Figure;ex_normal_velocity_1.eps
Click here to access/download;Figure;ex_normal_velocity_2.eps
                    Click here to access/download;Figure;ex_offline_knots_reconstruction.eps




               pk
                1
                       pk2


          pk
           0
                                            pk 3




pk
 0
     −1
                                                                                  pk3
                                                                                        +1
Click here to access/download;Figure;ex_rasterization_1.eps




        Ω
         Click here to access/download;Figure;ex_rasterization_2.eps




n
    qk
                Ω

     n
Click here to access/download;Figure;ex_target_smooth_1.eps
Click here to access/download;Figure;M1_10_evl_points.eps
Click here to access/download;Figure;M1_10_max_epe.eps
                Click here to access/download;Figure;M1_10_opc_epe_histogram.eps




    8
    6
Count
    4
    2
    0 −1      0                                         1
           EPE (nm)
Click here to access/download;Figure;M1_10_opc_result.eps
Click here to access/download;Figure;M1_1_evl_points.eps
Click here to access/download;Figure;M1_1_max_epe.eps
                     Click here to access/download;Figure;M1_1_opc_epe_histogram.eps




    15

Count
    10

        5

        0   −2      0                                    2
                 EPE (nm)
Click here to access/download;Figure;M1_1_opc_result.eps
Click here to access/download;Figure;M1_2_evl_points.eps
Click here to access/download;Figure;M1_2_max_epe.eps
                     Click here to access/download;Figure;M1_2_opc_epe_histogram.eps




    15

    10
Count
        5

        0   −2         0                                                     2
                 EPE (nm)
Click here to access/download;Figure;M1_2_opc_result.eps
Click here to access/download;Figure;M1_3_evl_points.eps
Click here to access/download;Figure;M1_3_max_epe.eps
                     Click here to access/download;Figure;M1_3_opc_epe_histogram.eps




    10
Count
        5

        0   −2      0                                  2
                 EPE (nm)
Click here to access/download;Figure;M1_3_opc_result.eps
Click here to access/download;Figure;M1_4_evl_points.eps
Click here to access/download;Figure;M1_4_max_epe.eps
                       Click here to access/download;Figure;M1_4_opc_epe_histogram.eps




    15

    10
Count
        5

        0−2   −1      0     1                                                   2
                   EPE (nm)
Click here to access/download;Figure;M1_4_opc_result.eps
Click here to access/download;Figure;M1_5_evl_points.eps
Click here to access/download;Figure;M1_5_max_epe.eps
                     Click here to access/download;Figure;M1_5_opc_epe_histogram.eps




    20

Count
    10


        0   −1      0                                     1
                 EPE (nm)
Click here to access/download;Figure;M1_5_opc_result.eps
Click here to access/download;Figure;M1_6_evl_points.eps
Click here to access/download;Figure;M1_6_max_epe.eps
                      Click here to access/download;Figure;M1_6_opc_epe_histogram.eps




    20

Count
    10


        0   −1    0       1                                            2
                 EPE (nm)
Click here to access/download;Figure;M1_6_opc_result.eps
Click here to access/download;Figure;M1_7_evl_points.eps
Click here to access/download;Figure;M1_7_max_epe.eps
                   Click here to access/download;Figure;M1_7_opc_epe_histogram.eps




    30

Count
    20

    10

        0 −1    0       1
               EPE (nm)
Click here to access/download;Figure;M1_7_opc_result.eps
Click here to access/download;Figure;M1_8_evl_points.eps
Click here to access/download;Figure;M1_8_max_epe.eps
                Click here to access/download;Figure;M1_8_opc_epe_histogram.eps




    8
    6
Count
    4
    2
    0 −1     0                                     1
           EPE (nm)
Click here to access/download;Figure;M1_8_opc_result.eps
Click here to access/download;Figure;M1_9_evl_points.eps
Click here to access/download;Figure;M1_9_max_epe.eps
                     Click here to access/download;Figure;M1_9_opc_epe_histogram.eps




    20
    15
Count
    10
        5
        0   −1        0                                       1
                 EPE (nm)
Click here to access/download;Figure;M1_9_opc_result.eps
Declaration of competing interests




               Declaration of interests

               ☒The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships
               that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

               ☐The authors declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be considered
               as potential competing interests:
Revised manuscript (marked up)                                                                        Click here to view linked References




                                      Parametric curvilinear mask optimization
                                               with rigorous gradient

                                                        Qi Xiaa,∗, Shiyuan Liua,∗
                                              a School of Mechanical Science and Engineering,

                                 Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430074, China




                Abstract

                A general framework is proposed for the parametric curvilinear mask optimization with rigorous
                gradient.    As an example of parametric curve, the piecewise cubic Bézier curve is employed
                to represent the curvilinear contour of mask. By optimizing only the normal displacements of
                online knots and reconstructing the offline knots, the number of design variables is reduced while
                maintaining the smoothness of curve. Rigorous gradient of the objective function is derived, in
                which continuum-based formulations of design velocity and indicator function provide important
                links between the variation of design variable and the variation of mask transmittance. Gradient
                based optimization with simple strategy of adaptive step size is implemented. In addition, the
                methods of rasterization and target smoothing are presented. The proposed framework can be
                employed for any parametric curvilinear mask and even for Manhattan-style mask. Experiments
                with masks whose average critical dimension is 87 nm and area is 2.36 µm2 demonstrate that the
                optimization can be completed around 2 seconds and the average of maximum edge placement
                error is below 3 nm.
                Keywords: Lithography, Curvilinear mask, Parametric curve, Rigorous gradient, Gradient-based
                optimization, Smooth target


                1. Introduction

                    Lithography is a critical step in integrated circuit manufacturing, aiming to faithfully transfer
                circuit patterns from mask to wafer. However, as critical dimension continues to shrink and device
                density keeps increasing, the optical proximity effect becomes increasingly prominent, leading to
                severe distortion of the patterns transferred to wafer and narrow process window. Under such
                circumstances, conventional mask optimization (MO) methods based on Manhattan-style mask


                   ∗ Corresponding authors

                    Email addresses: qxia@hust.edu.cn (Qi Xia), shyliu@hust.edu.cn (Shiyuan Liu)


                Preprint submitted to Elsevier                                                               August 13, 2026
exhibit serious limitations, and those based on curvilinear mask have become an important trend [1–
4]. The curvilinear masks are composed of 2D shapes enclosed by smooth curves, rather than
polygons in the Manhattan-style masks, thus offering higher flexibility in geometric description
and a broader solution space for MO. As a result, it can significantly improve the fidelity of
pattern transfer and extend the process window [1, 2].
   According to the approach employed to represent the curvilinear mask, there are the pixel-
based method, the level-set-based method, and the parametric-curve-based method for curvilinear
MO. The representation approach and the corresponding gradient analysis not only determine
the flexibility in changing the mask layout and the size of solution space, but also influences and
efficiency of optimization.
   In the pixel-based mask optimization [5–10], the mask is represented as a 2D array of pixels,
and the value of pixel represents the transmission in a small region. The pixel-based optimization
of binary mask is often considered in the literature, and it is essentially a 0-1 integer optimization
problem. A relaxation strategy followed with binarization is generally employed to convert it
into a continuous-variable optimization problem. Although rigorous gradient can be obtained, the
optimization is generally not so efficient due to the large number of pixel and the strong nonlinearity
introduced by the binarization. First, the smaller the pixel size, the richer the geometric details
that can be represented, and better fidelity can be reached, but the computational costs increase
rapidly. Second, a high degree of binarization introduces strong nonlinearity; but if the binarization
is insufficient, gray pixels cannot be completely removed. It is worthy to note that the multi-beam
mask writers used to manufacture curvilinear masks convert geometric descriptions (for instance
Bézier or B-spline curves) into greyscale pixel maps, thus the assumption of a strictly binary mask
representation is not necessary. Actually, if the pixel-based mask optimization explicitly accounts
for the pixel size and the number of available dose levels of multi-beam mask writers, high-fidelity
curvilinear features can be realized.
   In the level-set-based mask optimization [2, 11–17], the contour of mask is represented as the
zero-level set of a level-set function (LSF). During the optimization, a gradient-based optimization
algorithm is used to iteratively update the LSF, thereby implicitly modifying the mask contour.
The value of LSF provides a natural binarization, and thus the optimization is generally more
stable than the pixel-based one. In this method, the design variable is the contour of mask,
which is infinite-dimensional. In numerical implementation, the infinite-dimensional optimization
problem is converted to a finite-dimensional one. However, the number of design variables is still
large, and the convergence rate is generally slow.



                                                  2
   Despite the difficulties mentioned above, the pixel-based and level-set-based curvilinear MO
have achieved great success in past decades. In our view, the success not only comes from their
geometric flexibility but also from the rigorous gradient of the design variables and the subsequent
gradient-based optimization.
   Recently, many efforts are directed toward curvilinear MO with the masks being represented
by parametric curves [18–25]. Since a relatively small number of parameters can describe complex
curvilinear mask contours, the parametric-curve-based mask optimization often has much less
design variables, and thus the efficiency of optimization can be effectively improved.
   However, obtaining the rigorous gradient of an objective function with respect to the design
variables constitutes a major technical difficulty. Generally, the objective function to be minimized
is the edge placement error (EPE) or the L2 norm of the difference between exposed and target
patterns, and the design variables are the position of control points or weights of basis functions. If
the gradient is not available, some gradient-free optimization methods are often employed [21, 24],
for instance the genetic algorithm or particle swarm optimization, but these methods are not so
efficient as the gradient based optimization. Another alternative way to resolve this difficulty is to
use EPE as an approximation of the rigorous gradient [22]. Although this way is effective in many
cases, an EPE only reflects the impact of mask bias at an evaluation point, while ignoring the
influences of mask in the neighborhood around the evaluation point. Actually, this is the reason
why the matrix-OPC (optical proximity correction) via MEEF (mask error enhancement factor)
matrix is more effective than the EPE-based OPC [26–28]. However, because calculation of MEEF
matrix is computationally expensive, it is only used in critical regions.
   In this paper, a general framework is proposed for the parametric curvilinear mask optimization
with rigorous gradient. As an example of the parametric curve, piecewise cubic Bézier curve is
employed to represent the contour of mask. The design variables are carefully selected to compress
their total number, and the design velocity due to the variation of design variables are obtained.
The gradient of the objective function with respect to the design variable is rigorously derived
for gradient-based optimization, which constitutes an important contribution of the present study.
The proposed framework can be used for curvilinear masks represented by any parametric curves
and even for Manhattan-style masks.




                                                  3
2. Representation of curvilinear mask

2.1. Cubic Bézier curve

    In the present study, the contour Γ of mask Ω ∈ R2 is described by many segments of cubic
Bézier curves, and the coordinates of points on such a segment is defined as [29]
                                               3
                                               X
                                      C(s) =         Bi (s)pi ,   0≤s≤1                                       (1)
                                               i=0

where Bi (s) is the Bernstein polynomial Bi (s) = C3i si (1 − s)3−i ; pi = (xi , yi ) are the control points
or the so-called knots. As shown in Fig. 1, among the four knots of a cubic Bézier curve, p0 and p3
lie on the curve, and they are called the “online knots”; p1 and p2 are not on the curve, and they
are called the “offline konts”. For a closed curve comprises many segments of cubic Bézier curve,
an online knot is both the 0-th knot for one segment and the 3-rd knot for the previous segment.
    The tangent vector and unit normal vector of Bézier curve are given by
                                                 3
                                         dC(s) X dBi (s)
                                  t(s) =      =          pi ,           0≤s≤1                                 (2)
                                          ds    i=0
                                                    ds

                                                          1
                                             n(s) =             Rt(s)                                         (3)
                                                       ||t(s)||
where R is a matrix to rotate a vector by π/2.
                                               p1                 p2




                             p0                                                    p3



Figure 1: An example of cubic Bézier curve and its four knots. The blue curve is the cubic Bézier curve; the red
dots are the knots. p0 and p3 are the “online knots”; p1 and p2 are the “offline konts”



    As can be seen in Fig. 1, the shape of curve is controlled by using only four knots, and the
online knots will be employed to define the design variables in the parametric curvilinear OPC.
Therefore, while maintaining sufficient geometric flexibility, the number of design variables can be
significantly reduced as compared with the pixel-based or the level-set-based OPC method. Such
reduction is highly helpful to improve the efficiency of optimization.




                                                         4
2.2. Rasterization

   Given the mask contour, the transmittance of mask should be constructed on a discrete grid
for subsequent numerical computations, and such a process is called rasterization, which amounts
to compute the indicator function of the region Ω occupied by the mask.
   For a two dimensional region Ω, its indicator function is defined as
                                            
                                            1, if q ∈ Ω
                                            
                                    χ(q) =                                                           (4)
                                            0, otherwise
                                            


To facilitate numerical computation and derivation of rigorous gradient as will be presented in
section 4.2, Eq. (4) is rewritten as [30]
                                                  Z
                                        χ(q) =         δ(q − q ′ )dΩ                                 (5)
                                                   Ω

where δ(·) is the 2D Dirac delta function defined as δ(q − q ′ ) = δ(x − x′ )δ(y − y ′ ), q = (x, y), and
q ′ = (x′ , y ′ ). The gradient of χ(q) is written as [30, 31]
                                                  Z
                                       G(q) = − n(q ′ )δ(q − q ′ )dΓ                                 (6)
                                                  Γ

where n is the outward unit normal vector of Γ.
   According to an conservation condition [30, 31], G is approximated by G         e y ) as
                                                                              ex , G
                                                                         e = (G
                                                                               ij    ij


                                   e ij = −
                                              X                       |∆Γk |
                                   G              n(q k )Dij (q k )                                  (7)
                                                                        h2
                                              k

where i, j are the column and row indices of grid points; k is the index of sampling points on the
boundary Γ; ∆Γk is a small segment of Γ with the point q k = (xk , yk ) being its center and |∆Γk |
being its length; h is the grid size; Dij (q k ) = d(xk /h − i)d(yk /h − j) is the approximation of the
2D Dirac delta function, and d(·) is the approximation of 1D Dirac delta function defined as [30]
                                            
                                            1 − |r|, |r| ≤ 1
                                            
                                     d(r) =                                                    (8)
                                            0,       |r| > 1
                                            


   Suppose that the mask lies in a simulation domain D ∈ R2 , as shown in Fig. 2(a). The value
of indicator function at the boundary of D is set to zero. The curvilinear contour Γ is first divided
into many short segments ∆Γk , and the center points of these segments are taken as the sampling
points q k in Eq. (7), as shown in Fig. 2(b). In the present study, the length |∆Γk | of these segments
is set to h/4 so that there are about four segments in one pixel.



                                                       5
                                                             e y is integrated along the y direction.
                e x is integrated along the x direction, and G
    Thereafter, G ij                                           ij

After the average of the two integrations are obtained, it is clipped to [0, 1], and the result is
the value of indicator function. The rasterization can be first conducted on a fine grid, and then
down-sampled to a coarser grid by using the FFT (fast Fourier transform) based interpolation.



                                                                               n
                                                                                     qk
                                 Ω                                                         Ω

                                                                                      n




                           (a)                                                       (b)


Figure 2: Pre-processing of mask contour for rasterization. (a) input curvilinear mask and reference domain, (b)
segments ∆Γk , sampling points q k shown in red color, and unit normal vectors n(q k ).




2.3. Design variables

    During the process of mask optimization, the design variables are iteratively changed by an
optimization algorithm, and the shape of mask is updated accordingly. In order to reduce the
number of design variables, maintain sufficient geometric flexibility, and ensure smoothness of
mask contour, the design variables should be properly selected.
    First, in order to ensure smoothness of mask contour, only the positions of online knots are
actively changed during the optimization, and those of the offline knots are passively reconstructed
after the online knots are changed, as in [18]. The reason is explained as follows. Considering two
consecutive segments of cubic Bézier curves, the knots of the k-th segment are pk0 , pk1 , pk2 , pk3 , and
those of the (k+1)-th segment are pk+1
                                   0   , pk+1
                                          1   , pk+1
                                                 2   , pk+1
                                                        3   . The tangent vector of the k-th segment
at the end point, i.e., pk3 , is along the direction of vector pk2 pk3 . The tangent vector of the (k+1)-
th segment at the starting point, i.e., pk+1
                                         0   , is along the direction of vector pk+1
                                                                                 0   pk+1
                                                                                      1   . Note that
pk3 = pk+1
       0   . In order to ensure that the tangent direction is continuous at pk3 , the knots pk2 , pk3 , pk+1
                                                                                                         1

should lie on the same line, which implies that a collineation constraint should be introduced into
the optimization. Because enforcement of such constraints affects the efficiency of optimization,



                                                        6
the strategy that only actively optimizes the positions of online knots is adopted. In addition, such
a strategy halves the number of design variables.




Figure 3: The online knots are restricted to move along the direction of the normal vector of the curve at the knots.
The black curves represent the mask contours; the blue lines represent the normal vectors; the red dots represent
knots.



    Second, in order to prevent self-crossing of the optimized Bézier curve, the online knots are
restricted to move along the normal direction of the curve. As can be seen in Fig. 3, when the
distance between neighboring online knots are sufficiently large and the online knots does not
move too far, self-crossing can be prevented. Accordingly, the design variables in the optimization
are selected as the movement distances of the online knots along the normal direction from their
original positions.

2.4. Reconstruction of offline knots

    After the online knots have been updated in an iteration during the optimization, the offline
knots need to be reconstructed, and then a new Bézier curve is obtained with all the knots according
to Eq. (1). The procedure is the same as the implicit cubic Bézier curve in the industry standard
SEMI P49-0823, and it is described as follows for the convenience of readers. Also, readers can
refer [18] and SEMI P49-0823 for the details.
    As illustrated in Fig. 4, pk−1
                               0   , pk0 , pk3 , and pk+1
                                                      3   are online knots. For the k-th segment of curve,
there are only two knots up to now, i.e., pk0 and pk3 , and the other two knots pk1 and pk2 need to be
reconstructed. First, the angle bisectors of ∠pk−1
                                               0   pk0 pk3 and ∠pk0 pk3 pk+1
                                                                         3   are constructed. Second,
tangent lines perpendicular to the bisectors are obtained. Finally, at a certain distance from pk0
along the tangent line, the offline knot pk1 is generated, and the other offline knot pk3 is generated
similarly. After applying the same procedure to the (k-1)-th segment of curve, the reconstructed
offline knot pk−1
              2   and pk1 , the online knots pk−1
                                              3   (being identical to pk0 ), are on the same line.
Therefore, the tangent of updated curve are continuous at pk0 , which ensures the smoothness of


                                                         7
curve. It is worth noting that because only the online knots need to be stored into the file of mask,
the size of file can be reduced by 50%.

                                                  pk
                                                   1
                                                                  pk  2


                                      pk
                                       0
                                                                             pk
                                                                              3




                  pk
                   0
                       −1
                                                                                                pk
                                                                                                 3
                                                                                                     +1




Figure 4: Reconstruction of offline knots. Blue dots represent online knots that are actively changed; red dots
represent offline knots that are passively reconstructed; green dashed lines represent bisectors of angle; orange lines
are the tangent lines.




2.5. Variation of mask contour and design velocity

    Suppose that the position of a knot pi is changed along the direction of a unit vector di , and
define the variation of pi as
                                                       δpi = di δti                                                (9)

where δti can be regarded as the magnitude of δpi . Then, substituting δpi into Eq. (1), the
variation of coordinates of the points on mask contour is given as

                                           δC pi = Bj (s)δpi = Bj (s)di δti                                       (10)

where the subscript j in Bj (s) is the local index of the knot pi in a segment of Bézier curve, and
j = 0 or 3 for the online knots.
    Because the variation along the tangent direction only introduces re-parameterization of the
curve and does not change the shape of mask, only the variation along the normal direction needs
to be considered. The normal variation of Γ caused by δpi is given by

                                δC pni = ⟨δC pi , n(s)⟩ = ⟨di , n(s)⟩ · Bi (s)δti                                 (11)

where ⟨·, ·⟩ represents the inner product of vectors. In the optimization, since the online knots
moves in the normal direction, the unit vector di in Eq. (11) is replaced by ni . The term before
δti in Eq. (11) is usually called the “design velocity” [32, 33], i.e.,

                                              Vnpi = ⟨ni , n(s)⟩ · Bi (s)                                         (12)


                                                            8
Because an online knot belongs to two adjacent segments of curve, Eq. (12) should be applied to
both of the two segments to compute two design velocities respectively, and the design velocities
on the rest segments of the mask contour are zero, as shown in Fig. 5.




                             (a) example 1                                                    (b) example 2

Figure 5: Examples of design velocity due to the normal movement of online knots. Red curves are the mask
contour; red dots are the online konts; blue curves are the envelops of design velocity; black lines are the design
velocities.




3. Lithography model

3.1. Analytical model

    The Hopkins diffraction theory [34] decouples the contributions of the optical system and the
mask to the imaging process. The intensity of aerial image is given by
                     Z Z Z Z +∞
           I(x, y) =            TCC(f ′ , g ′ ; f ′′ , g ′′ ) · M̂ (f ′ , g ′ ) · M̂ ∗ (f ′′ , g ′′ )
                                         −∞                                                                               (13)
                                                 · exp −j2π x(f ′ − f ′′ ) + y(g ′ − g ′′ ) df ′ dg ′ df ′′ dg ′′
                                                                                         


where (x, y) denotes the spatial coordinates at the image plane; (f, g) denotes the spatial frequency
coordinates at the pupil plane; M̂ (f, g) is the mask diffraction spectrum obtained by Fourier
transformation of the mask pattern M (x, y); ∗ denotes the complex conjugate; TCC is the
transmission cross coefficient that describes the imaging characteristics of the optical system, and
it is written as
                                                Z Z +∞
              TCC(f ′ , g ′ ; f ′′ , g ′′ ) =            S(f, g) · H (f ′ + f, g ′ + g) · H ∗ (f ′′ + f, g ′′ + g)df dg   (14)
                                                  −∞

where S is the normalized source intensity; H is the projection pupil written as
                                      
                                      ej 2π
                                                     p
                                            λ W,  if f 2 + g 2 ≤ NA
                                      
                                                                  λ
                            H(f, g) =                                                                                     (15)
                                      0,
                                      
                                                  otherwise


                                                                     9
where λ is the wavelength of source; W is the aberration; NA is the numerical aperture. The
                                   p
aberration due to defocus is W = ∆z 1 − (f 2 + g 2 )λ2 where ∆z is the defocus.
   In numerical computation, the TCC is represented by a Hermitian matrix given by

                                                     S(f, g)hf,g h†f,g = HSH†
                                              X
                                       T=                                                                               (16)
                                               f,g

where hf,g is a column vector that denotes the vector form of H shifted by f and g; † denotes
conjugate transpose; the product hf,g h†f,g can be implemented by the rank-1 update of a Hermitian
matrix; H is a matrix obtained by concatenating vectors hf,g ; S is a diagonal matrix, and the
elements on the diagonal are equal to the normalized source intensities. Applying eigenvalue
decomposition to the Hermitian matrix T, and using the first K dominant eigenmodes, one
obtains [35]
                                                              K
                                                              X
                            TCC(f ′ , g ′ ; f ′′ , g ′′ ) ≈         µi · φ̂i (f ′ , g ′ ) · φ̂∗i (f ′ , g ′ )           (17)
                                                              i=1

where µk are the eigenvalues, and φ̂i are the eigenvectors. The eigenvalues and eigenvectors can
also be obtained by applying singular value decomposition (SVD) to matrix P = HSsqrt [36],
where Ssqrt is a diagonal matrix, and the elements on the diagonal are equal to the square root
of normalized source intensities. Since T = PP† , one can readily find out that the eigenvalue
decomposition of T is equivalent to the SVD of P.
   With the TCC given by Eq. (17), the intensity of aerial image can be rewritten as [35]
                           K                                                2       K
                           X                                                        X                               2
                                 µi F −1 φ̂i (f, g) · M̂ (f, g)
                                        
               I(x, y) =                                                        =         µi φi (x, y) ⋆ M (x, y)       (18)
                           i=1                                                      i=1

where F −1 denotes the inverse Fourier transform; φi (x, y) is the inverse Fourier transformation of
the eigenverctor φ̂i (f, g), i.e., φi (x, y) = F −1 {φ̂i (f, g)}, and it is also called the convolution kernel;
⋆ denotes the two-dimensional convolution.
   Finally, the pattern obtained in the photoresist is expressed through the Sigmoid function as

                                                                  1
                                           Z(x, y) =                                                                    (19)
                                                          1 + e−α(I(x,y)−tr )

where α is the slope parameter; tr is the threshold of photoresist.


3.2. Numerical settings

   Under partially coherent illumination, due to the presence of off-axis source points, the highest
frequency at which diffracted light can pass through the imaging system is fmax = (1 + σ) NA
                                                                                           λ

where σ is the partial coherence factor. According to the Shannon–Nyquist sampling theorem [37],


                                                               10
for the purpose of correctly describing the aerial image via a 2D discrete pixel array, the sampling
frequency fs should satisfy fs ≥ 2fmax . Accordingly, the pixel size h should satisfy

                                              1      1
                                         h=      ≤                                             (20)
                                              fs   2fmax

Usually, the pixel size is selected based on the critical dimension (CD) of the mask, excluding the
sub-resolution assist feature (SRAF), for instance

                                                    CD
                                              h=                                               (21)
                                                     k

where k is an empirical parameter whose typical value is around 5. After h is selected according
to Eq. (21), it can be checked by using Eq. (20).
   The numbers of pixels npixel (the number of rows or columns of the square pixel array) used
to describe the mask M , the pupil H, and the eigenvector φ̂i are the same. It is chosen to be
2 to the power of n, such as 128, 256, etc, so that the computational efficiency of fast Fourier
transformation (FFT) can be maximized. After having chosen the values of h and npixel , the mask
size is obtained as l = npixel · h. When the actual size of the input mask is less than l, the mask
is placed at the center of a square bounding box whose size is l. The frequency domain resolution
∆f is given by ∆f = 1/l. This ∆f is used for mask, pupil, and Hopkins kernels.
   Finally, in order to calculate the linear convolution (not circular convolution) in the spatial
domain through inverse Fourier transformation as Eq. (18), npixel needs to satisfy [37]

                                                   4fmax
                                        npixel ≥         +1                                    (22)
                                                    ∆f

Eq. (22) is used to check whether the value of h and npixel are set properly.
   It is worthy to note that applying Eq. (19) to compute the resist image produces high frequency
components that do not exist in the aerial image. In such circumstance, if the pixel size is not
adequately reduced, aliasing occurs, which results in distortion of simulated wafer contour and
directly contributes to errors in EPE. Therefore, the aerial image obtained by Eq. (18) is first
up-sampled to a fine grid by using the FFT based interpolation, then the resist image is computed
via Eq. (19). With the high resolution resist image, the pattern contour on wafer and EPEs are
obtained. In addition, the high resolution resist image is down-sampled to the same grid of aerial
image by using the FFT based interpolation, and the result is used to compute the pattern error
and rigorous gradient, which will be described in the next section.




                                                   11
4. Optimization problem and its solution

4.1. Definition of the optimization problem
   Suppose that the region Ω occupied by the mask is enclosed in a simulation domain denoted
as D ∈ R2 , i.e., Ω ⊂ D. The goal of the optimization is to minimize the difference between the
exposed pattern Z and a target pattern Z0 . Such a difference is defined as
                                      ZZ
                                 L=        (Z(q) − Z0 (q))2 dΩ                                 (23)
                                               D

As explained in section 2.3, the design variables in the optimization are the movement distances
of the online knots along the normal direction from their original position. Here, they are denoted
as ti . Therefore, the mask optimization problem is defined as

                                             t∗i = arg min L(ti )                              (24)
                                                        ti

Eq. (24) is an unconstrained optimization problem. One can also put box constraints on the design
variables, i.e., tmin ≤ ti ≤ tmax , to prevent the online knot from moving too far. Such constraints
may be helpful to ensure sufficient width of line or space which relates to the manufacturability
of masks. Because the issue of manufacturability is not the focus of the present study, such box
constraints are not considered in the optimization.

4.2. Rigorous gradient
   The rigorous gradient of the objective function L with respect to the design variables ti is an
important issue for the mask optimization based on parametric curve, and it will be addressed in
the following. The variation of L is written as
                                          ZZ
                                    δL =       2(Z − Z0 )δZ dΩ                                 (25)
                                                   D

According to Eq. (19), we have
                                           δZ = αZ(1 − Z) · δI                                 (26)

According to Eq. (18), we have
                                    K
                                    X
                             δI =         µi [Ai (φi ⋆ δM )∗ + A∗i (φi ⋆ δM )]                 (27)
                                    i=1

where Ai = φi (x, y) ⋆ M (x, y).
   Substituting Eqs. (26)-(27) to Eq. (25), and picking out δM via the relation (f ⋆g)·p = f ·(g ◦p)
where · denotes the inner production and ◦ denotes the cross-correlation[5], we have
                                       ZZ
                                δL = 4     ∇LM (q) · δM (q) dΩ                                 (28)
                                                D


                                                       12
where ∇LM is given by
                                   K
                                   X
                                                      α(Z − Z0 )Z(1 − Z) · Ai ⋆ φ∗i
                                                                           
                          ∇LM =          µi Re                                                    (29)
                                   i=1

As one can see in Eq. (29), ∇LM is the gradient of mask transmittance commonly used in the
pixel-based optimization, and it is called the “gradient density” in the present study.
   When the transmittance of mask is 0 or 1, M is equal to the indicator function of Ω, i.e.,
M (q) = χ(q). With the indicator function given in Eq. (5), the variation of M (q) due to the
normal variation of mask contour is given by
                                         Z
                              δM (q) =      δ(q − q ′ ) δC pni (q ′ ) dΓ                          (30)
                                                     Γ

where δ(q − q ′ ) is the 2D Dirac delta function; the normal variation of mask contour δC pni (q ′ ) is
given by Eq. (11). Substituting Eq. (30) to Eq. (28), and using the sifting property of the Dirac
delta function, we obtain                    Z
                                    δL = 4           ∇LM (q) · δC pni (q) dΓ                      (31)
                                                 Γ

Substituting Eqs. (11) and (12) into Eq. (31), we have
                                       Z
                                δL = 4 ∇LM (q) · Vnpi (q) δti dΓ                                  (32)
                                             Γ

Therefore, the rigrous derivative of L with respect to ti is
                                          Z
                                  ∂L
                                      = 4 ∇LM (q) · Vnpi (q) dΓ                                   (33)
                                  ∂ti      Γ
                                                                                      p
Since an online knot only effects two adjacent segments of curve Γk−1 and Γk , Vn i (q) is zero on
the rest parts of the mask contour, as shown in Fig. 5. The integration in Eq. (33) can only be
performed on the two segments. Because the value of ∂L/∂ti is affected by the length of the curve
segments Γk−1 and Γk , the length of Bézier curve segments should be uniform so that the impact
of length can be eliminated.
   The present study provides a general framework for parametric curvilinear mask optimization
with rigorous gradient. As one can see, there are three important links in the derivation of rigorous
gradient. First, using the analytical function of parametric curve, the link between variation of
design variable and variation of mask contour is obtained, and it is called the “design velocity”, as
can be seen in Eq. (12). Second, using the analytical indicator function of the region enclosed by
the mask contour, the link between variation of mask contour and variation of mask transmittance
is obtained, as can be seen in Eq. (30). Third, the rigorous gradient is obtained by the integrating
on the contour the product of gradient density and design velocity, as can be seen in Eq. (33).


                                                          13
   According to such a process, the framework can be applied to any parametric curves, for
instance the B-spline or non-uniform rational B-Spline. In addition, one can see that the proposed
framework can also be applied to Manhattan-style masks. When an edge Γi in the Manhattan-
style mask is perturbed, the design velocity corresponds to the perturbation is Vn = 1, and the
                                                   R
derivative of the perturbation is simply given by 4 Γi ∇LM dΓ.

4.3. Optimization method

   With the derivative given in Eq. (33), the optimization problem defined in Eq. (24) is solved by
using a gradient-based method. In the present study, the steepest descent algorithm and a simple
strategy to adjust the step size is employed.
   According to the steepest descent algorithm, the design variables ti are updated according to

                                                            ∂L
                                          tk+1
                                           i   = tki − sk                                          (34)
                                                            ∂ti

where the super-script represents the step of iteration; sk is the step size used in the k-th iteration.
The strategy to adjust the step size is: (1) if the value of objective function is increased by a
certain ratio, the step size is reduced. For instance, if Lk ≥ Lk−1 , then sk = 0.6sk−1 . (2) if the
value of objective function is reduced by a certain ratio, the step size is enlarged. For instance, if
Lk ≤ 0.9Lk−1 , then sk = 1.05sk−1 .
   The line search in classical optimization methods is not incorporated into the optimization
because it requires several attempts of step size in each iteration, which needs considerable
computation for lithography imaging simulation.             In our future work, several optimization
methods will be tested in the proposed framework, including conjugate gradient method, BFGS
(Broyden–Fletcher–Goldfarb–Shanno) method etc.

4.4. Target pattern

   When the input mask is Manhatten-style, it contains high-frequency features, for instance sharp
corners and jogs, and they will be lost due to the low-pass filtering effect of the projection imaging
system. In practical OPC, such features are not required to be exactly transferred to the silicon
wafer, as long as the EPE at some evaluation points are below an admissible value. Therefore, the
target pattern Z0 can be accordingly modified, which is usually called “target smoothing” [38, 39].
   In the present study, the target smoothing is accomplished by using the cubic Bézier curve, and
the procedure is described in the following. First, classify the edges in the Manhatten-style mask
into jog, line/space end, short segment, and long segment, according to the length of the edge and
direction of its two neighboring edges. Second, for each segment, knots are generated according


                                                  14
to several rules, and we call them “Manhattan knots”. Finally, smoothed target is computed by
using these Manhattan knots.
    It is worth noting that the Manhattan knots are not used to define the design variables in the
optimization, because the lengths of curve segments between such knots are not uniform (recall
the discussion below Eq. (33)). Instead, after the smoothed target is obtained, the curvilinear
contour is uniformly sampled, and these sampling points are used as the online knots. Thereafter,
the offline knots are reconstructed, and the collection of these knots are called “curvilinear knots”.
Examples of Manhattan knots, curvilinear knots, and smoothed target are shown in Fig. 6.




        (a) Manhattan knots                     (b) smooth target                     (c) curvilinear knots

Figure 6: Examples of Manhattan knots, smooth target, and curvilinear knots. The blue lines represent the bounding
box; the black lines represent the input Manhattan-style mask; the red curves represent the smoothed target; the
red dots represent the knots.



    After the smoothed target having being obtained, the target pattern Z0 is computed by using
the signed distance function Φ of the contour of smoothed target, and it is given by

                                                               1
                                     Z0 (q) =                                                               (35)
                                                              Φ(q)     tr
                                                1 + exp        σ − ln 1−tr

where σ is a parameter that controls the steepness of Z0 around Γ; tr is the threshold parameter
in Eq. (19). It can be readily verified that Eq. (35) ensures the value of Z0 equal to tr on Γ.
    The signed distance function Φ is computed by

                                         Φ(q) = sign(q) · dist(q, Γ)                                          (36)

where sign(q) is the sign function; dist(q, Γ) is the minimal Euclidean distance between point q
and the contour Γ. The distance is computed by using the fast sweeping method [40]. The sign



                                                       15
function can be readily obtained by using the indicator function χ(q) in Eq. (4) as

                                      sign(q) = −2 χ(q) + 1                                   (37)

The minus sign in Eq. (37) ensures the gradient vector of the sign function pointing outwards to
the boundary. The indicator function χ(q) and the distance function dist(q, Γ) are computed on
a grid refined by 16 times, then Z0 is obtained via Eq. (35), finally it is down-sampled via the
FFT-based interpolation.
   In order to further evaluate the fidelity of simulated wafer contour, some evaluation points are
placed on the smoothed target, and the EPEs at these evaluation points are computed after OPC.
The evaluation points are generated by using the Manhattan knots through Eq. (1) with s = 0,
0.5, and 1.


5. Experimental results

   The proposed method is implemented into an in-house software “LithoLab”.             The C++
and Python programming language are used.            The C++ code is compiled into dynamically
linked libraries, and they are called in the Python code that accomplishes the OPC. The C++
development tools include Mingw-w64 14.2.0 and Boost.Python 1.87.0; OpenMP is used to
parallelize the core algorithms; FFTW 3.3.5 is used for fast Fourier transformation; OpenBLAS
0.3.30 is used to compute TCC and eigenvalue decomposition. Python 3.9.0 and NumPy 2.0.2 is
used to write the OPC scripts. The computer used in the experiments comprises Windows 10,
Intel Xeon Gold 6226R CPU, and 128GB memory.
   The Manhattan-style masks provided in the ICCAD 2013 contest [41] are first scaled by 1.25
and then used as the input of mask optimization. The parameters of the lithography system
include: numerical aperture NA = 0.93, wave length λ = 193nm, annular source with σin = 0.7
and σout = 0.9. Parameters in the resist model are α = 40 and tr = 0.35. Parameter σ = 4.5 in
Eq. (35). In the numerical computation, the mask is represented by 128 × 128 pixels with the pixel
size h = 12 nm (thus the area of mask is 2.36 µm2 ); the source is represented by 64 × 64 pixels
with the resolution ∆fsource = NA/(32λ). The number of TCC kernels is K = 64. The kernels
are prepared in a pre-processing phase and saved in a file, and the time used to compute TCC
kernels is 349 ms. The initial step size in the steepest descent optimization is s0 = 1.4, and the
optimization is terminated after 30 iterations. All the optimizations are conducted with the same
settings.



                                                16
   The smoothed targets and evaluation points are shown in Fig. 7; the results of mask optimiza-
tions are shown in Fig. 8; the comparison between the smooth targets and the simulated wafer
contours are shown in Fig. 9. As can be seen in Fig. 8, the optimized curvilinear masks are fairly
smooth; the line width and space width are reasonable. Also, it can be seen in Fig. 9 that the
simulated wafer contour is close to the smoothed target and that the maximums of the absolute
value of EPE arise near corners. The histograms of EPEs at evaluation points are shown in Fig. 10.
   The maximum of the absolute value of EPE (denoted as E ∗ ), the objective function L, and
the runtime are provided in Tab. 1. As can be seen, the average of E ∗ is 1.98 nm. In six of the
ten cases E ∗ is below 2 nm, and in the other four cases E ∗ is relatively large (above 2 nm). In
the second case E ∗ = 2.96 nm is the largest one. In future work they will be reduced. In Table 1,
the value of L does not perfectly correlate with E ∗ , since L counts for global difference, but EPE
is a local indicator of error. The average runtime of the optimizations is 5.35 seconds. According
to such runtime, OPC for a 100 mm2 wafer area with CD around 87 nm can be finished within
63 hours using 1000 CPUs. Although accurate imaging simulation requires a vector model of the
lithography imaging process and it may need more computation time than the scalar model of the
present study, the results of runtime show the potential for full-chip application.
   Finally, the pixel-based method is also employed for the OPC, with the same settings as those
mentioned before, except that the initial step size is s0 = 0.3. The value of the initial step size
is carefully chosen, and if the value is larger (for instance 0.35) the optimization of many cases
would be quite oscillating or even do not converge. The objective function is L + w(1 − M )M
where (1 − M )M is the penalty to binarize the pixel values M , and w is the weight of binarization
(w = 0.05). The quantitative results of optimization are provided in Table 1. As can be seen, the
runtime used by the pixel-based optimization is less than that of the proposed method, but E ∗ and
L are not so good as those of the proposed method. More importantly, the optimized pixel-based
masks contain many gray pixels.
   The histories of objective function during optimization of the first three cases are shown
in Fig. 11, for both the proposed method and the pixel-based method. As can be seen, the
optimizations by the proposed method converge smoothly, and those by the pixel-based method
are not sufficiently converged. More importantly, one can clearly see that the convergence rate of
the proposed method is higher than the pixel-based method.
   In our view, the advantage of the pixel-based method lies in its ability to generate SRAF that
extends process window, while the advantage of the parametric curve-based method lies in its
efficiency in ensuring the fidelity of wafer contour. For a comprehensive OPC solution, the two



                                                 17
methods should be intimately combined to deliver both high fidelity pattern and wide process
window. In our future work, the SRAF will be first generated, and then the contour of SRAF and
main pattern will be simultaneously optimized by using the proposed method. If the EPE is used
as an approximation of rigorous derivative, the SRAF cannot be optimized since EPE cannot be
defined on SRAF. This is another advantage of the proposed framework.

Table 1: Results of curvilinear mask optimization with the masks in the ICCAD 2013 constest (with a scaling factor
1.25), and the comparison with the pixel-based method. E ∗ (nm) represents the maximum of the absolute value of
EPE; L (nm2 ) is the L2 norm of pattern error; T (s) represents the runtime.
     Case            1        2       3        4        5        6       7        8        9       10     mean
      CD            80       80       75      80       85       84      101      101      84      100      87
            E∗      2.82    2.96     2.94    1.86     1.37     2.15     1.56    1.36     1.51     1.28    1.98
 Present
             L      429     394      591      226      169     220      133       53      133     128      248
 method
             T      5.23    5.20     5.29    5.21     5.27     5.40     5.33    5.48     5.59     5.51    5.35
                ∗
  Pixel-    E       4.97    4.69    11.05    24.00 5.16        3.63     3.89    3.84     9.84     2.78    7.39
  based      L      943     1035    2120     3941      524     520      389      177     1130     284     1106
 method      T      4.40    4.40     4.38    4.33     4.40     4.35     4.38    4.42     4.44     4.42    4.39




6. Conclusions

    Curvilinear mask is flexible in geometric description and offers a broad solution space for
optical proximity correction (OPC). As a result, it can significantly improve the fidelity of patterns
transferred to wafer and extend the process window. In this paper, a general framework is proposed
for parametric curvilinear mask optimization with rigorous gradient. As an example of parametric
curve, piecewise cubic Bézier curve is employed to represent the curvilinear contour of mask. The
design variables are judiciously chosen to compress their total number, while maintaining curve
smoothness and geometry flexibility. By employing the concept of design velocity and gradient
density, the gradient is rigorously derived, and a gradient-based optimization is achieved. In
addition, the methods of rasterization, reconstruction of offline konts, and target smoothing are
also presented. With the masks in ICCAD 2013 contest scaled by 1.25 times (average CD 87 nm),
each OPC takes about 2 seconds; maximum EPE remains below 5 nm. Under the same settings of
lithography and optimization, the proposed method outperforms the pixel-based methods in both
maximum EPE and pattern error. Overall, this framework offers an effective and efficient way
for the optimization of curvilinear masks and even Manhattan-style masks. Also, after an initial


                                                       18
                 (a) case 1                         (b) case 2                         (c) case 3




                 (d) case 4                         (e) case 5                         (f) case 6




                 (g) case 7                         (h) case 8                         (i) case 9




                                                   (j) case 10

Figure 7: The smoothed target and evaluation points for the masks in the ICCAD 2013 contest (with a scaling factor
1.25). The blue lines represent the bounding boxes; the black lines represent the input Manhattan-style masks; the
                                                       19 represent the points where the fidelity of the simulated
red curves represent the smoothed targets; the black dots
wafer contour is evaluated.
                 (a) case 1                         (b) case 2                          (c) case 3




                 (d) case 4                         (e) case 5                          (f) case 6




                 (g) case 7                         (h) case 8                          (i) case 9




                                                    (j) case 10

Figure 8: Results of mask optimizations with the masks in ICCAD 2013 contest (with a scaling factor 1.25). The
blue lines represent the bounding boxes; the black lines represent the input Manhattan-style masks; the blue curves
                                                        20represent the simulated wafer contour.
represent the optimized curvilinear masks; the red curves
                (a) case 1                         (b) case 2                         (c) case 3




                (d) case 4                         (e) case 5                         (f) case 6




                (g) case 7                         (h) case 8                         (i) case 9




                                                   (j) case 10

Figure 9: Comparison between the smooth targets and the simulated wafer contours. The blue lines represent the
bounding boxes; the blue curves represent the smooth targets; the red dashed curves represent the simulated wafer
contour; the star–shaped markers indicate the evaluation21points where the maximum of the absolute value of EPE
arise.
                                                         15                                                                                                    15
       15                                                                                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                       10
                                                         10                                                                                                    10
Count  10                                            Count                                                         Count                                   Count                                                   Count
                                                                                                                           5                                                                                           10
            5                                                5                                                                                                     5

            0           −2      0            2               0       −2         0                          2               0    −2        0            2           0−2       −1                  0     1       2           0   −1       0            1
                             EPE (nm)                                     EPE (nm)                                                     EPE (nm)                                               EPE (nm)                               EPE (nm)


                        (a) case 1                                  (b) case 2                                                  (c) case 3                               (d) case 4                                            (e) case 5

                                                                                                                       8
       20                                                30                                                                                                    20                                                      8
                                                                                                                       6
                                                                                                                                                               15                                                      6
Count                                                Count                                                         Count                                   Count                                                   Count
                                                         20
                                                                                                                       4                                       10                                                      4
       10
                                                         10                                                            2                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                   5
            0           −1    0       1          2           0 −1          0       1                                   0 −1             0              1           0     −1                        0       1           0 −1             0            1
                             EPE (nm)                                     EPE (nm)                                                    EPE (nm)                                                EPE (nm)                               EPE (nm)


                        (f) case 6                                  (g) case 7                                                  (h) case 8                               (i) case 9                                            (j) case 10

                                                                 Figure 10: The histograms of EPEs at evaluation points.




                  5.0                                                                                5.0                                                                                  5.0
                                             proposed method                                                                          proposed method                                                                proposed method
                  4.5                        pixel-based method                                      4.5                              pixel-based method                                                             pixel-based method
                                                                                                                                                                                          4.5



  Error (log scale)                                                                  Error (log scale)                                                                    Error (log scale)
                  4.0                                                                                4.0                                                                                  4.0
                  3.5                                                                                3.5
                                                                                                                                                                                          3.5
                  3.0                                                                                3.0
                                                                                                                                                                                          3.0
                                                                                                     2.5
                         0              10              20                30                                   0                 10               20          30                                  0            10               20              30
                                          Iteration                                                                                  Iteration                                                                     Iteration


                                  (a) case 1                                                                                   (b) case 2                                                                  (c) case 3

Figure 11: The history of the objective function during optimization, for both the proposed method and the pixel-
based method.




                                                                                                                                 22
layout of SRAF is obtained by other methods, for instance the interference mapping [42, 43], this
framework can be employed to simultaneously optimize the main pattern and the SRAF.


Funding

   National Natural Science Foundation of China (52130504).


CRediT authorship contribution statement

   Qi Xia: Writing – review and editing, Methodology, Investigation, Software, Conceptualiza-
tion. Shiyuan Liu: Writing – review and editing, Investigation, Conceptualization.


Declaration of competing interest

   The authors declare the following: Qi Xia, Shiyuan Liu have financial interests in Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, a university holding patents related to technologies for OPC
and applications.


Data availability

   Data underlying the results presented in this paper are not publicly available at this time but
may be obtained from the authors upon reasonable request.


References

 [1] L. Pang, Inverse lithography technology: 30 years from concept to practical, full-chip reality,
    Journal of Micro/Nanopatterning, Materials, and Metrology 20 (2021) 030901–030901.

 [2] T. Cecil, D. Peng, D. Abrams, S. J. Osher, E. Yablonovitch, Advances in Inverse Lithography,
    ACS Photonics 10 (4) (2023) 910–918.

 [3] Y. Yang, K. Liu, Y. Gao, C. Wang, L. Cao, Advancements and challenges in inverse
    lithography technology: A review of artificial intelligence-based approaches, Light: Science
    & Applications 14 (1) (2025) 250.

 [4] L. Pang, A. Fujimura, Why the mask world is moving to curvilinear, Journal of Mi-
    cro/Nanopatterning, Materials, and Metrology 23 (4) (2024) 041503.



                                                23
 [5] Y. Granik, Fast pixel-based mask optimization for inverse lithography, Journal of Mi-
    cro/Nanolithography, MEMS, and MOEMS 5 (4) (2006) 043002.

 [6] X. Ma, G. R. Arce, Generalized inverse lithography methods for phase-shifting mask design,
    Opt. Express 15 (23) (2007) 15066–15079.

 [7] V. Singh, B. Hu, K. Toh, S. Bollepalli, S. Wagner, Y. Borodovsky, Making a trillion pixels
    dance, in: Optical Microlithography XXI, Vol. 6924, SPIE, 2008, pp. 264–275.

 [8] X. Ma, G. R. Arce, Pixel-based simultaneous source and mask optimization for resolution
    enhancement in optical lithography, Optics Express 17 (7) (2009) 5783.

 [9] N. Jia, E. Y. Lam, Pixelated source mask optimization for process robustness in optical
    lithography, Optics Express 19 (20) (2011) 19384.

[10] S. Sun, F. Yang, B. Yu, L. Shang, X. Zeng, Adaptive ILT via Multi-Level Lithography
    Simulation, IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems
    44 (11) (2025) 4341–4354.

[11] D. S. Abrams, L. Pang, Fast inverse lithography technology, in: Optical Microlithography
    XIX, Vol. 6154, SPIE, 2006, pp. 534–542.

[12] L. Pang, G. Dai, T. Cecil, T. Dam, Y. Cui, P. Hu, D. Chen, K.-H. Baik, D. Peng, Validation
    of inverse lithography technology (ILT) and its adaptive SRAF at advanced technology nodes,
    in: Optical Microlithography XXI, Vol. 6924, SPIE, 2008, pp. 276–287.

[13] Y. Shen, N. Wong, E. Y. Lam, Level-set-based inverse lithography for photomask synthesis,
    Optics Express 17 (26) (2009) 23690.

[14] W. Lv, S. Liu, Q. Xia, X. Wu, Y. Shen, E. Y. Lam, Level-set-based inverse lithography for
    mask synthesis using the conjugate gradient and an optimal time step, Journal of Vacuum
    Science & Technology B 31 (2013) 041605.

[15] Y. Shen, Lithographic source and mask optimization with narrow-band level-set method,
    Optics Express 26 (8) (2018) 10065.

[16] Z. Yu, G. Chen, Y. Ma, B. Yu, A GPU-enabled level-set method for mask optimization,
    IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems 42 (2023)
    594–605.



                                               24
[17] C. Huang, X. Ma, S. Zhang, M. Lin, N. Porras-Dı́az, G. Arce, Block-based inverse lithography
    technology with adaptive level-set algorithm, Optics and Laser Technology 182.

[18] Y. Chen, K. Chang, W. Cheng, Y. Tang, Curvilinear mask handling in OPC flow, Journal of
    Micro/Nanopatterning, Materials, and Metrology 23 (01).

[19] P. Wei, Y. Li, Z. Li, M. Yuan, H. Yang, Implicit function characterization of the curvilinear
    mask to realize parametric optical proximity correction with a neighborhood parallel tabu
    search, Applied Optics 62 (18) (2023) 4848.

[20] W. Huang, Y. Li, H. Yang, M. Yuan, Z. Zhang, Z. Li, Z. Li, Fast and high-fidelity EUV
    curvilinear mask optimization by distance-versus-angle signature, Optics Express 32 (15)
    (2024) 26292.

[21] H. Yang, Y. Li, M. Yuan, Z. Li, W. Huang, Z. Li, Efficient curvilinear optical proximity
    correction using non-uniform B-spline curves, Applied Optics 63 (34) (2024) 8818.

[22] S. Zheng, X. Liang, Z. Yu, Y. Ma, B. Yu, M. Wong, Curvilinear optical proximity correction
    via cardinal spline, in: 2025 62nd ACM/IEEE Design Automation Conference (DAC), IEEE,
    San Francisco, CA, USA, 2025, pp. 1–7.

[23] S. Kim, S. Zhang, Y. Shin, ML-Guided Curvilinear OPC: Fast, Accurate, and Manufacturable
    Curve Correction, IEEE Transactions on Semiconductor Manufacturing 38 (1) (2025) 19–28.

[24] W. Huang, Y. Li, Z. Li, Y. He, M. Yuan, Z. Li, High-fidelity curvilinear mask optical proximity
    correction using tangent angle-arc length curve, Optics Express 33 (11) (2025) 23796.

[25] Y. Granik, S. Saxena, Inverse lithography in polar coordinates, in: DTCO and Computational
    Patterning V, SPIE, San Jose, United States, 2026, p. 19.

[26] Y. Granik, N. Cobb, MEEF as a matrix, in: 21st Annual BACUS Symposium on Photomask
    Technology, Vol. 4562, SPIE, 2002, pp. 980–991.

[27] N. Cobb, Y. Granik, Model-based OPC using the MEEF matrix, in: B. J. Grenon, K. R.
    Kimmel (Eds.), Photomask Technology 2002, Monterey, CA, 2002, p. 1281.

[28] J. Lei, L. Hong, G. Lippincott, J. Word, Model-based OPC using the MEEF matrix II, in:
    K. Lai, A. Erdmann (Eds.), SPIE Advanced Lithography, San Jose, California, USA, 2014,
    p. 90520N.



                                                25
[29] L. A. Piegl, W. Tiller, The NURBS Book, second edition Edition, Springer, Berlin, 1997.

[30] G. Tryggvason, B. Bunner, A. Esmaeeli, D. Juric, N. Al-Rawahi, W. Tauber, J. Han, S. Nas,
    Y.-J. Jan, A front-tracking method for the computations of multiphase flow, Journal of
    Computational Physics 169 (2001) 708–759.

[31] S. Shin, D. Juric, Modeling three-dimensional multiphase flow using a level contour
    reconstruction method for front tracking without connectivity, Journal of Computational
    Physics 180 (2002) 427–470.

[32] C. A. C. Silva, M. L. Bittencourt, Velocity fields using NURBS with distortion control for
    structural shape optimization, Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization 33 (2) (2006)
    147–159.

[33] K. K. Choi, N. H. Kim, Structural sensitivity analysis and optimization 1: linear systems,
    Springer, 2005.

[34] H. H. Hopkins, On the diffraction theory of optical images, Proceedings of the Royal Society
    of London. Series A. Mathematical and Physical Sciences 217 (1130) (1953) 408–432.

[35] N. Cobb, Fast optical and process proximity correction algorithms for integrated circuit
    manufacturing, University of California, Berkeley, 1998.

[36] C. Chen, A. Gurhanli, T. Chiang, J. Hong, L. S. Melvin, Abbe singular-value decomposition:
    Compact Abbe’s kernel generation for microlithography aerial image simulation using singular-
    value decomposition method, Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B 26 (6) (2008) 2322–
    2330.

[37] D. Voelz, Computational Fourier Optics: A MATLAB Tutorial, SPIE, Wash. USA, 2011.

[38] H. Yang, H. Ren, GPU-accelerated inverse lithography towards high quality curvy mask
    generation, in: Proceedings of the 2025 International Symposium on Physical Design, ACM,
    Austin TX USA, 2025, pp. 42–50.

[39] H. Sun, Q. Zhang, J. Zhou, J. Gong, C. Jin, J. Zhou, J. Liu, A Hierarchical Inverse Lithography
    Method Considering the Optimization and Manufacturability Limit by Gradient Descent,
    Micromachines 16 (7).

[40] S. Bak, J. McLaughlin, D. Renzi, Some improvements for the fast sweeping method, SIAM
    Journal on Scientific Computing 32 (2010) 2853–2874.


                                                26
[41] S. Banerjee, Z. Li, S. R. Nassif, ICCAD-2013 CAD contest in mask optimization and
    benchmark suite, in: 2013 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Computer-Aided Design
    (ICCAD), IEEE, San Jose, CA, USA, 2013, pp. 271–274.

[42] R. J. Socha, D. J. Van Den Broeke, S. D. Hsu, J. F. Chen, T. L. Laidig, N. Corcoran,
    U. Hollerbach, K. E. Wampler, X. Shi, W. Conley, Contact hole reticle optimization by using
    interference mapping lithography (IML), in: Microlithography 2004, Santa Clara, CA, 2004,
    p. 222.

[43] Y. Granik, Qualification of structured curvilinear ILT assist features for production, Journal
    of Micro/Nanopatterning, Materials, and Metrology 23 (02) (2024) 021302.




                                                27
             Click here to access/download
Revised manuscript (unmarked, editable source file)
                  database.bib
             Click here to access/download
Revised manuscript (unmarked, editable source file)
  parametric_curvilinear_mask_optimization.tex
